---
layout: post
title:  "Example of dynamic inefficiency in the baseline OLG model"
date:   2017-10-05 23:23:00 -0400
categories: update
macrosquad_event: true
---

Reasonable parameter values are presented that give dynamic inefficiency in the canonical OLG model.

<!--more-->

## Statement of dynamic inefficiency

Details of the model presented in Proposition 6.2 of the Fall 2017 ECON 605 Stolyarov notes. The model parameterizes utility according to

$$
\begin{align*}
U_t(c_{1,t}, c_{2,t+1}) = \ln c_{1,t} + \beta \ln c_{2,t+1}
\end{align*}
$$

and the economy has access to labor-augmenting Cobb--Douglas technology:

$$
\begin{equation*}
Y_{t} = K_{t}^{\alpha} (A_t L_t)^{1-\alpha} = K_{t}^{\alpha} ((1+g)^t L_t)^{1-\alpha}.
\end{equation*}
$$

The growth rate of output is

$$
\begin{equation*}
1+g_Y = (1+n)(1+g).
\end{equation*}
$$

Proposition 6.2 establishes that the economy is dynamically inefficient (in terms of consumption per worker) if

$$
\begin{equation*}
r_{\star} < g_Y,
\end{equation*}
$$

where the long-run interest rate is given by

$$
\begin{equation*}
r_{\star} = \alpha (k_{\star})^{\alpha -1} - \delta.
\end{equation*}
$$

Steady-state capital per effective worker is

$$
\begin{equation*}
k_{\star} = \frac{1+\beta}{\beta} \frac{\alpha}{1-\alpha} (1+g)(1+n) - \delta.
\end{equation*}
$$

## Parameter values

Take a generation to be 30 years long.
If the annual discount factor is \\(.99\\), then the 30-year discount factor is \\(.99^{\text{years}}\\).
The parameter \\(\alpha\\) is standard and represents the factor share of capital.
Population between periods evolves according to \\(L_{t+1} = (1+n)L_t\\).
If population grows at a \\(.5\\) percent annual rate,
the 30-year rate is \\( 1+n = (1.005)^{30} \\).
Likewise, assume technology grows at a \\( 1 \\) percent annual rate.

The Python code that makes these calculations is:

```python
yrs = 30
beta = 0.99**yrs
alpha = 0.25
n = (1.005)**yrs - 1
g = (1.01)**yrs - 1
```

The same calculations go into the 30-year depreciation rate.
A unit of capital, \\(X_t\\), depreciates according to \\( X_{t+1} = (1-\delta)X_t \\).
Positing a 10 percent annual depreciation rate, the 30-year \\( \delta \\) solves
\\( 1 - \delta = .9^{30} \\).

```python
delta = 1 - 0.90**yrs
print(delta)
    0.9576088417247838
```
This is a small value,
which must serve as the motivation for the baseline models we read about in books to consider full depreciation.

We are now in position to calculate whether the economy demonstrates dynamic inefficiency:

```python
rstar = ((1+beta)/beta)*(alpha/(1-alpha))*(1+g)*(1+n) - delta
print(rstar)
    0.2696055232612754
gY = (1+n)*(1+g)-1
check = rstar < gY
check_dist = gY - rstar
print(check)
print(check_dist)
    True
    0.29578631873675876
```

Yes, reasonable parameter values deliver dynamic inefficiency.
Blanchard and Fischer in "Lectures on Macroeconomics," pp 102--103, put it eloquently:
> This suggests the importance of the golden-rule level of capital.
If the steady-state capital stock exceeds the golden-run level,
a *decrease* in the capital stock *increases* steady-state consumption.
This is because the capital stock has become so large
that its productivity is outweighed by the amount of resources that have to be used up each period
just to provide the newborn with the existing level of capital per worker:
the economy staggers under the weight of the need to maintain the per-capita capital stock constant.
