---
layout: post
title:  "Determining whether capital jumps"
date:   2017-06-19 17:32:00 -0400
macrosquad_event: true
---

A few people have asked me whether or not \\( \tilde{k} \\) jumps in the F2014 midterm.
It does.
Does that mean the stock of capital jumps?
What about \\(k\\)?

<!--more-->

## Showing that \\(\tilde{k}\\) jumps
I think the confusion arises because [my notes on the problem](https://umich.box.com/s/14r5lvjjoq9wwz0d6mor8jn49v6vig5g)
look at properties of \\(\ln y \equiv \ln \left( Y / L \right) \\) instead of \\(\tilde{k}\\).
[The question asks about the time series of \\(\ln y \\).]
But these two quantities are obviously closely related.

To show that \\(\tilde{k}\\) jumps we can proceed just like we do on page 12 of the [review](https://umich.box.com/s/14r5lvjjoq9wwz0d6mor8jn49v6vig5g).
Something happens at time \\(T\\) and we're interested in showing that \\(\tilde{k}\\) jumps up:

$$
\begin{align*}
\tilde{k}(T+0) - \tilde{k}(T-0) &> 0 \\\\
\iff \tilde{k}(T+0) &> \tilde{k}(T-0).
\end{align*}
$$

Here's the key: we need to know that \\(h, \; K, \; N, \; A \\) are all stock variables
that do not jump.
This idea is stated in the [review](https://umich.box.com/s/14r5lvjjoq9wwz0d6mor8jn49v6vig5g) on page 12.

So.
Plugging in, we have

$$
\begin{align*}
\tilde{k}(T+0) &> \tilde{k}(T-0) \\\\
\iff K(T+0)/Z(T+0)N(T+0) &> K(T-0)/Z(T-0)N(T-0) \\\\
\iff Z(T+0)^{-1} &> Z(T-0)^{-1} \\\\
\iff Z(T-0) &> Z(T+0),
\end{align*}
$$

as \\(Z\\) is going to be a positive number.

Plugging in for \\(Z\\) we have

$$
\begin{align*}
A(T-0)h(T-0)^{\frac{\gamma}{1-\alpha} + 1} &> A(T+0)h(T+0)^{\frac{\gamma^{\prime}}{1-\alpha} + 1} \\
\iff h^{\frac{\gamma}{1-\alpha} + 1} &> h^{\frac{\gamma^{\prime}}{1-\alpha} + 1} \\\\
\iff h^{\frac{\gamma}{1-\alpha}} &> h^{\frac{\gamma^{\prime}}{1-\alpha}}.
\end{align*}
$$

This is true because \\(h^{x}\\) is decreasing in \\(x\\) when \\(h < 1\\),
a property established in the review notes.
We've therefore established that \\(\tilde{k} \\) jumps up.
:thumbsup:

## The stock of capital does not jump

Even though \\(\tilde{k}\\) jumps, the capital stock does not jump.
We used this fact when we determined whether or not \\(Y\\) or \\(\tilde{k}\\) jumped.
What about \\(k \equiv K / N \\)?
No---both \\(K\\) and \\(N\\) are stocks.

Stock variables will not jump for the most part.
And when they do, you'll know.
For example,
Professor Stolyarov will set Godzilla loose on the economy to destroy part of the capital stock
:office: :boom: :computer: :boom:
or have a plague wreak havoc on the population, causing \\(N\\) to jump :skull:
